---
layout: post
title: Injecting environment variables from a file with xargs
description: How to provide environment variables stored in a .env file as an input for a command execution without having to export then, with a deep look at the shell commands used.
tags:
  - Espresso
  - Shell
  - Tooling
---

## TL;DR

You can use

```bash
env $(cat .env | grep -v "#" | xargs) your_command_expecting_env_vars
```

to run `your_command_expecting_env_vars` providing it the content of `.env` like you would do when running `FOO=1 BAR=2 your_command_expecting_env_vars`.

## TS;WR

Many command lines tool can read, or even expect, values set in environment variables.

It is a common practice to place environment variables contextual to a project in a `.env` file in the project root, and there are tools like [`dotenv`](https://github.com/bkeepers/dotenv) that allow you to load those variables into your application.

Sometimes thought you just need to set a handful of values and cannot be bothered typing `FOO=1 BAR=2 BAZ=3 bundle exec foobarbaz`. Or maybe your cli tool expects a token that you don't want to store in the repo, but at the same time cannot type every time.

In such cases it might be useful to place those environment variables in a `.env` file, but how to load them?

This is one possible way:

```
env $(cat .env | grep -v "#" | xargs) your_command_expecting_env_var
```

Let's disassemble this long command, shall we?

`$(...)` will be evaluate it's content before the command is interpreted and run, and replaced with the result, so that what actually is run will be `env result your_command_expecting_env_var`.

`cat .env` will put the content of the `.env` file into the standard output. This would normally be the screen, but in this case there is a pipe operator.

`grep -v "#"` is an inverted match grep. By default `grep` selects lines containing the given pattern, the string `#` in our case, from its standard input. With the `-v`, or `--invert-match` it will select the lines not matching the given string.

So `cat .env | grep -v "#"` results in the content of `.env` apart from comment lines sent to the standard output, where `xargs` is there to wait for it. `xargs` builds an argument list out of its standard input.

This argument list is fed to `env`. The synopsis of this command is:

```bash
env [-i] [name=value ...] [utility [argument ...]]
```

What `env` does is executing `utility` after modifying the environment as specified by the `name=value ...` list. And that is exactly the end result that we are looking for 😎

A nice thing to notice is that `env` doesn't export the `name=value` inputs, so that the environment is not polluted.

Hope you found this article useful, [this](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/19331497/set-environment-variables-from-file/#answer-20909045) is the SO answer that inspired and helped me with this approach.

If you need help get in touch with me on Twitter [@mokagio](https://twitter.com/mokagio), or leave a comment below. And don't forget to hit the share button 😉.

_Happy coding, and leave the codebase better than you found it._

